# Generating C bindings

The C bindings are generated by a separate executable `build/mrbind_gen_c`. It consumes the [parser output JSON](/docs/running_parser.md), and generates C headers and C++ implementation files, which you are then free to compile with any compiler.

## Running the generator

The minimal generation invocation looks like this:

```sh
mrbind_gen_c \
    --input parse_result.json \
    --output-header-dir output/include \
    --output-source-dir output/src \
    --helper-name-prefix MyLib_ \
    --map-path path/to/input/headers . \
    --assume-include-dir path/to/input
```

Let's go over the options. You can find more detailed descriptions in `mrbind_gen_c --help`.
* **`--input __.json`** is the input JSON as [produced by the parser](/docs/running_parser.md) (`mrbind`).
* **`--output-header-dir __` `--output-source-dir __`** are the output directories for the headers and source files respectively.

  The default behavior is to error if those aren't empty. Pass `--clean-output-dirs` to automatically delete all contents before generation.

* **`--helper-name-prefix MyLib_`** sets the name prefix for certain generated functions/types/etc. This can be anything, but ideally you should pass your C++ namespace name followed by `_`.

  This isn't used for everything. The parsed names from the input will be prefixed with their C++ namespace names regardless of this flag. This prefix is used primarly for additional helper functions that we sometimes generate.

  This prefix is also used for macros by default. If you want a different prefix for macros (e.g. because this one isn't in all caps), pass it as `--helper-macro-name-prefix MYLIB_`.

* **`--map-path IN OUT`** controls the output directory hierarchy. Can be passed multiple times.

  For each input C++ header, we generate the respective output C header with the same name, and a C source file with the same name. (This only happens for headers that didn't have their contents filtered out by the parser's `--ignore`, so you don't need to worry about the standard library or third-party library headers.)

  Every such input C++ header must be located in one of the `IN` directories (this flag can be used several times to specify several directories). `IN` can be absolute or relative, it's made absolute internally anyway.

  `OUT` must always be relative. It's treated as relative to `--output-header-dir`/`--output-source-dir`.

  For example, if your input headers are `a/b/c/d/1.hpp`, `a/b/c/d/2.hpp`, and the output directories are `--output-header-dir include --output-source-dir src`, then:

  * `--map-path a/b .` would generate `include/c/d/1.h`, `include/c/d/2.h` and `src/c/d/1.c`, `src/c/d/2.c`.

  * `--map-path a/b foo/bar` would generate `include/foo/bar/c/d/1.h`, `include/foo/bar/c/d/2.h` and `src/foo/bar/c/d/1.c`, `src/foo/bar/c/d/2.c`.

  * `--map-path a/b/c .` would generate `include/d/1.h`, `include/d/2.h` and `src/d/1.c`, `src/d/2.c`, and so on.

* **`--assume-include-dir IN`** specifies which directories will be given to the compiler as include directories (via `-I...`).

  It's similar to `--map-path` in that it can be used multiple times, and every input C++ header must be one of the `IN` directories.

  For example, if your input headers are `a/b/c/d/1.hpp`, `a/b/c/d/2.hpp`, then `--assume-include-dir a/b` would cause the generator to use `#include <c/d/1.hpp>`, `#include <c/d/2.hpp>` to include those headers.

  NOTE: If your input headers use the `.h` extension, they can end up conflicting with the output `.h` headers with same names. To avoid this, don't pass directories that directly contain input headers, and instead pass their parents.

  For example, if your input header is named `a/b/c/d/1.h`, then don't pass `--assume-include-dir a/b/c/d`, and instead pass `a/b/c` or `a/b` or `a`.

  If you pass `--assume-include-dir a/b/c/d`, then the following will happen. The generated `1.c` will contain:

  ```c
  #include "1.h" // Include the generated C header `1.h`.
  #include <1.h> // Include the parsed C++ input header `1.h`.
  ```
  At least one of those will resolve incorrectly. (Since neither of those headers will be in the same directory as `1.c`.)

  And if you instead pass `--assume-include-dir a/b/c`, then you'll get:
  ```c
  #include "1.h"
  #include <d/1.h>
  ```
  Which is unambiguous, assuming you correctly set your include paths.

## Ignoring problematic parts of the code

If the generation fails because of certain problematic functions/types/etc, [exclude them from the bindings](/docs/skipping_entities.md).

## Completeness

Unlike Python, if C bindings generate and then compile successfully, you can be fairly sure that nothing is missing and they'll work correctly.

## Compiling the generated code

On success, the directories passed to `--output-header-dir`, `--output-source-dir` will contain the resulting C/C++ code, which you can compile with your preferred compiler, usually into a shared library.

You need at least following compiler flags:

* Add both `--output-header-dir` and `--output-source-dir` to the include search paths.

* Add your input C++ headers to the include search paths. Use the same directories you passed to `--assume-include-dir`.

## Tuning the generated bindings

All flags beflow are for `mrbind_gen_c`, unless mentioned otherwise.

### File name length limit

Some generated headers can end up with long filenames (e.g. if you bind `std::tuple` with a 100 members). To set a limit on filename length, use `--max-header-name-length N` (e.g. with `N`=`100`). Longer filenames will get truncated, and hashes will be appended to those names to make them unique.

### Move the extra headers

We generate some additional headers, such as `exports.h` for the shared library export macro, or headers for the standard containers if you use them.

By default all those headers end up directly in the `--output-header-dir`, which can look bad.

Use `--helper-header-dir some/dir` to move them to a subdirectory. `some/dir` is relative to `--output-header-dir`, and will typically be `MylibMisc`, or something along those lines.

### Inherit class members

Pass `--copy-inherited-members` to the parser (`mrbind`) to paste the members from the base classes into the classes derived from them. Otherwise you'll have to manually upcast the pointers to call the base methods.

This applies only to the implicitly inherited members. Members explicitly inherited via `using`, including constructors, are copied unconditionally.

### Exception handling

We try to handle C++ exceptions by default.

There is a global callback that gets called when an exception escapes a C function. You can change it using `..._SetSimpleExceptionHandler()`. The default behavior is to print the exception and terminate, but you can change this, e.g. to set your own global variable to indicate the error and continue, for example. Setting the callback to null disables exception catching at runtime, letting them fall out of the C functions.

You can opt out of exception handling entirely using `--no-handle-exceptions`, then we'll pretend that exceptions don't exist.

Note that `--no-handle-exceptions` can be set independently from `-fno-exceptions`:

* If you use `--no-handle-exceptions` but not `-fno-exceptions`, then exceptions will escape C functions.

* If you don't use `--no-handle-exceptions` but use `-fno-exceptions`, then the C headers will still include the functions for dealing with exceptions (such as setting custom handlers for them), but they will do nothing.

  So the C headers are decoupled from whether your C library is internally compiled with `-fno-exceptions` or not. C users can check exception support at runtime.

One more thing: currently, using `-fno-exceptions` makes it impossible to recover from certain errors caused by incorrect usage of the bindings, which would be exceptions if exceptions were enabled. We may or may not fix this eventually.

### Expose simple structs as structs

The default behavior is to expose all classes/structs as opaque heap-allocated pointers.

If you have sufficiently simple structs, you can opt into exposing them as plain C structs instead. The prime candidates for this are `struct Vec3 {float x,y,z;};` and such.

To do this, pass your struct name to `--expose-as-struct ...`. Use this flag multiple times to expose multiple structs. Invalid names are silently ignored.

The struct must be trivial enough: [trivially-copyable](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TriviallyCopyable), [standard-layout](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/classes.html#Standard-layout_class), all members are public, no base classes. The members must have built-in types, or must themselves be structs passed to `--expose-as-struct` (so e.g. `struct Mat3 {Vec3 x,y,z;};` can be exposed correctly). If those requirements aren't satisfied, the generator will complain.

The specified name needs to be fully qualified (with all namespaces), and include all template arguments, e.g. `--expose-as-struct 'MyLibrary::Vector3<int>'`. (The `'...'` quotes are not a part of the syntax, use quotes appropriate for your shell if needed.)

You can expose several classes via a regex, e.g. to expose `Foo::Bar<T>` for any `T`, you could do `--expose-as-struct '/Foo::Bar<.*>/'`. (Again,  the `'...'` are your shell's quotes, while `/.../` is a part of the syntax, to indicate that this is a regex.)

### Make generated headers include each other

The generated headers are shy about including each other, preferring forward declarations when possible. The end result is that the end user will often have to include many ancillary headers (e.g. if a function returns `std::string` and you want to interact with its return value, you need to manually include the header with the binding for `std::string` too).

`--add-convenience-includes` fixes this. It's not enabled by default because it can be too eager with the includes, slowing down the user builds (though it adds a macro that lets users opt out of the extra includes).

### Don't generate elementwise constructors for large structs

When a C++ struct is an aggregate (i.e. has no constructors, and in C++ can be initialized with a list of its members in braces), we try to generate a C function for it that acts as a constructor, with a parameter for every member.

This can get out of hand with huge structs. Use `--preferred-max-num-aggregate-init-fields N` (with e.g. `N`=`20`) to not generate those functions for structs with more than `N` members.

This flag is ignored for non-default-constructible structs, as this could make them impossible to construct.

### Using fixed-size typedefs

Passing `--canonicalize-to-fixed-size-typedefs` will use `int32_t` and other similar standard typedefs instead of all built-in integer types.

This is purely a style choice, and doesn't help portability. For portability, see [this](#making-the-bindings-cross-platform).

## Making the bindings cross-platform

If you don't go out of your way, by default the generated C bindings code code will only be usable on one platform you generated them on.

But with some care, it's possible to make the resulting code fully consistent and portable across platforms. This section explains how to do it.

After following the steps below, it's *your* job to test on all platforms you support to make sure that everything works (if you generate the bindings on different platforms, you might want to check that they are exactly the same; or if you generate on only one platform but then send the code to other platforms to compile it there, test that it actually compiles). Each of the platforms (Windows, Linux, Mac, Emscripten) has some unique differences that can affect the output if not addressed.

First the simple things:

### Underlying types of enums

On Windows, the underlying type of plain `enum`s defaults to `int`, while on Linux it's either `int` or `unsigned int` depending on whether there are negative constants or not. This underlying type shows up in the generated C headers.

This only affects the plain `enum`, not `enum class`, which is specified by the C++ standard to always default to the `int` underlying type.

The fix is to pass `--implicit-enum-underlying-type-is-always-int` to the **parser**. This will make it report the default type as `int` (if the underlying type is specified in C++), regardless of what it actually is.

So far this hasn't caused any breakage for us.

### `std::expected` vs `tl::expected`

If you switch between `std::expected` and `tl::expected` on different platforms, depending on what's available, this can help.

Pass `--merge-std-and-tl-expected` to the **generator** to remove the namespaces from both, renaming both to just `expected`.

This only renames things in C headers, but the full namespace will still be hardcoded in the generated `.cpp` files.

### `size_t` and other standard typedefs

This is the biggest source of issues and differences between platforms.

The problem is that the MRBind parser expands the typedefs. So among other things, it's going to expand `std::size_t`, `std::int64_t`, etc. It means that in the C bindings, they will appear as `long`, `long long`, etc. (Can't we access the original spelling? Not in any non-trivial cases, more on that below.)

This isn't just a style issue. This causes code generated on different OSes to be different, and causes compilation errors when generating the code on one platform and then compiling it on another.

We can solve this by limiting what types you can use in your interfaces, and then applying certain type replacement rules to the parser results, making them consistent across platforms.

There are several different options:

Option|Can use `long`|Can use `long long`|Can use `[u]int64_t`|Can use `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t`|Resulting code is cross-platform?|Parser must imitate a particular platform? (see below)
---|---|---|---|---|---|---
A|❌|❌|✅|✅|✅ Yes|⚠️ Yes
B|❌|❌|⚠️*|✅*|⚠️ 64-bit only|✅ No
A2|❌|✅|❌|✅|✅ Yes|⚠️ Yes
B2|❌|❌|✅|❌|⚠️ 64-bit only|✅ No
None|✅|✅|❌|❌|❌ No|✅ No

**Option A produces best results**, but it adds parser configuration complexity (as indicated in the last column). If that's undesired, then use option B. Options A2 and B2 should probably be avoided.

\* In option B, you can't use the standard `[u]int64_t` in your interface, and instead must use a certain custom typedef, as explained below. Moreover, all uses of `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t` in your interface will be rewritten to `[u]int64_t` in the bindings (which makes the code not portable to 32-bit platforms, where those types are supposed to be 32-bit).

As you can see, in all cases you must remove `[unsigned] long` and `[unsigned] long long` from your interfaces.

Each option requries passing certain flags to MRBind, which are explained below.

### Option A

If you're not running the parser on a Mac, then you must pass `--target=wasm32-unknown-emscripten` to the parser (after `--`) to make it *pretend* that your platform WASM/Emscripten. The resulting bindings will work on any platform, they are not WASM-specific. This flag only affects some predefined macros and include directories of the parser, and importantly it changes the standard typedefs to what is favorable to us. On Macs you don't have to do this, since their standard typedefs are already good.

The reason for this is that only on Emscripten and Mac, `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t` and `[u]int64_t` expand to different types (`long` and `long long`), which allows the parser to distinguish them.

You must also pass the following flags to the parser: `--canonicalize-long-to-size_t --canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs`.

Passing `--target=wasm32-unknown-emscripten` will remove the standard library from the include search path. Normally you're supposed to provide Emscripten headers instead, using `--sysroot=...`, where `...` can be obtained from Emscripten SDK by running `echo | em++ -fsyntax-only -v -xc++ - 2>&1 | grep -oP '(?<=^ ).*(?=/include/c\+\+/v1$)'` (note that this command generates that directory on the first run). But on Linux (on x64 but not on Arm) you can miraculously use the host headers (i.e. regular linux headers) instead; for that pass `-stdlib=libstdc++` and the list of flags printed by running the following command: `clang++ -xc++ /dev/null -fsyntax-only -v 2>&1 | awk '/^#include <...> search starts here:$/{x=1; next} !/^ /&&x{exit} x{gsub(/^ /,""); printf " -isystem%s", $0} END{print ""}'`. And if it complains about a missing `#include <gnu/stubs-32.h>` on Ubuntu, install `libc6-dev-i386`.

This causes it to rewrite `[unsigned] long` (which results from expanding `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t`) back to `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t`, and also rewrite `[unsigned] long long` (which results from expanding `[u]int64_t`) back to `[u]int64_t`.

Option **A2** is to trade `[u]int64_t` support for `[unsigned] long long` support. I don't see how that's useful, but that can be achieved by removing `--canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs` and only keeping `--canonicalize-long-to-size_t`.

### Option B

You must stop using `std::[u]int64_t`, and instead add the following typedef to your library:
```cpp
// Note, those typedefs are not compatible with option A. If you want to support both options, you have to add a condition to this `#ifdef` that option A is not being used.
#ifdef __APPLE__
#include <cstddef>
namespace mylib
{
    using Int64 = std::ptrdiff_t;
    using Uint64 = std::size_t;
    static_assert(sizeof(Int64) == 8);
    static_assert(sizeof(Uint64) == 8);
}
#else
#include <cstdint>
namespace mylib
{
    using Int64 = std::int64_t;
    using Uint64 = std::uint64_t;
    #endif
}
```
This `#ifdef __APPLE__` is somewhat cosmetic, because on other 64-bit platforms (tested Windows and Linux), `std::[u]int64_t` expand to the same type as `std::size_t` and `std::ptrdiff_t` anyway. It's only there to support 32-bit platforms.

And then you pass `--canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs --canonicalize-size_t-to-uint64_t` to the parser and `--reject-long-and-long-long --use-size_t-typedef-for-uint64_t` to the generator.

Here `--canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs` causes `long` or `long long` to be rewritten back to the `[u]int64_t`. Only one of those two types is rewritten (depending on the platform), and the other is left as is, but then the generator flag `--reject-long-and-long-long` is used to error if any such non-rewritten type got through (which indicates that you used a type in your interface that you weren't supposed to).

Macs are special in that they use different types for `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t` and `[u]int64_t` (`long` and `long long` respectively), which means you can't use both in your interface. Our solution to this is to replace `[u]int64_t` with a custom typedef that expands to `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t`. But then, since spelling it as `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t` in the generated code would be stupid, we use `--canonicalize-size_t-to-uint64_t`, which on Macs causes `[unsigned] long` to be rewritten as `[u]int64_t`, instead of rewriting `[unsigned] long long` that way. This would normally produce broken code, which is why we have `--use-size_t-typedef-for-uint64_t` that adds a custom 64-bit typedef (simialr to the example above) to the generated C code.

Option **B2** is a variant of this without the custom typedef and without `--canonicalize-size_t-to-uint64_t` + `--use-size_t-typedef-for-uint64_t`. You trade `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t` support for `[u]int64_t` support.

### More details about `size_t`

#### Why are we doing all this, again?

This is a long story.

To recap the problem: all 64-bit standard typedefs expand to different types (`long` vs `long long`) on different platforms. In particular:

* On Windows, `long` is 32 bits wide. So `size_t`, `int64_t`, and all other 64-bit wide standard typedefs use `long long`.
* On Linux, `long` is 64 bits wide, so it's used for all those typedefs instead.
* On Mac, `long` is 64 bits wide, but both `long` and `long long` are used, for different typedefs (because of course they are!). The typedefs with digits in their names (e.g. `int64_t`) use `long long`, while all the other ones (e.g. `size_t`) use `long`.
* Emscripten works like Mac. Notably, in both 32-bit and 64-bit Emscripten, `size_t` always expands to `long` (which is 32-bit and 64-bit wide respectively).

In other words:

Typedef|Windows x64|Linux x64|Mac and Emscripten
---|---|---|---
`[u]int64_t`|`long long`|`long`|`long long`
`size_t` and `ptrdiff_t`|`long long`|`long`|`long`

This is a problem if any of those typedefs are included with in bindings. They are going to expand to `long` vs `long long` on different platforms, making the generated code incompatible between platforms.

#### Can't we have the parser *not* expand typedefs in the input?

Turns out we can't. Consider the following code:
```cpp
template <typename T>
struct Vec3
{
    T x, y, z;
};

Vec3<long> a();
Vec3<long long> b();
Vec3<std::int64_t> c();
```
We want this to generate **3** different C types: `A_long`, `A_long_long`, and `A_int64_t`. `A_int64_t` can be a typedef for one of the other two, but it still needs its own (appropriately named!) copies of all the member functions. Because to interact with the return value of `c()`, the clients should be using `A_int64_t_Get_x(...)`, not `A_long_Get_x(...)`, which would be non-portable.

Doing it this way appears to be impossible, or at least very difficult. While I can make Clang substitute `long` and `long long` into the `Vec3<T>` template, I have no idea how to substitute `int64_t` in a way that produces the third distinct class I can interact with. Even if it can be hacked to do this, this makes no sense from the C++ point of view, this isn't something that a compiler is expected to be able to do.

And we can't just take e.g. `A<long>` and replace every mention of `long` inside with `int64_t`, because what if it originally was a literal `long`?

So in the end, a fully generic solution appears to be impossible. So instead we do the next best thing.

#### Rationale behind approach B: unifying Windows and Linux

The idea is simple. You get rid of all mentions of `long` and `long long` in your API, and instead use the standard typedefs, doesn't matter which ones.

Then on Windows, we have the generator rewrite every `long long` (that can now only come from expanding `int64_t` or another typedef) back to `int64_t` (so all typedefs converge to this one), and complain if sees any `long`. And on Linux we do the opposite, rewriting any `long` back to `int64_t`, and complaining if we see any `long long`.

The end result is that you lose the ability to use `long` and `long long` in your API directly. You still can use the standard 64-bit wide typedefs, but all of them get rewritten to `[u]int64_t`. This means `size_t` also gets rewritten as `uint64_t`, which is a bit sad, but acceptable.

This is achieved with the following flags:

* `--canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs` makes the parser replace `long long` with `int64_t` on Windows, and `long` with `int64_t` on Linux.

* `--reject-long-and-long-long` then makes the generator complain if it sees any `long` or `long long` (that wasn't replaced with a typedef).

Are we done yet? No.

#### Rationale behind approach B continued: unifying Mac with Windows/Linux

Mac breaks this beautiful hack, because it has typedefs for both `long` and `long long`. There `size_t` and `ptrdiff_t` use `[unsigned] long`, while `[u]int64_t` use `[unsigned] long long`. The rule of thumb is that if a typedef has digits in its name, it's going to expand to `long long`, and otherwise to `long`.

Because of this, with approach B you can't have both `[u]int64_t` and `size_t` in your API at the same time, you must choose one.

If you do nothing, `size_t` will get rejected, and `[u]int64_t` will work normally.

Some libraries might want this to stop at this, but since `size_t` seems more valuable then `[u]int64_t`, we provide a workaround that lets you keep it.

Passing `--canonicalize-size_t-to-uint64_t` to the parser (which only has effect on Mac, but can be passed everywhere for consistency) makes it replace the other/wrong type with with `[u]int64_t`: instead of `long long`, it'll replace `long`.

Normally this would produce broken code, but we counteract it with `--use-size_t-typedef-for-uint64_t` in the generator, which then rewrites `[u]int64_t` into a custom typedef `MyLib_[u]int64_t`, which on Mac is made to expand to `std::size_t` or `std::ptrdiff_t` respectively.

And to replace `[u]int64_t` we suggest using a custom typedef, [as shown above](#option-b).

#### Rationale behind approach A

This is the alternative to approach B.

The problem with B is that the resulting bindings are not portable across 64-bit vs 32-bit platforms. It's not always possible to generate separate sets of bindings for the two (e.g. if you have C# bindings too, and want them to run on both, and those call into the C bindings internally, so your C bindings must be compatible with both).

Also losing the ability to use `[u]int64_t` in the interface directly isn't very convenient.

What we can do instead is to embrace [the convenient typedef structure of Emscripten and Mac](#why-are-we-doing-all-this-again). That is if we only run the parser for those platforms (note that the parser can run in "cross-"compilation mode, so you can it on any platform, but it'll pretend to target Emscripten; then you can compile the resulting bindings for your actual platform).

Since `size_t` and `ptrdiff_t` there uniquely map to `[unsigned] long`, we can have the parser rewrite `[unsigned] long` back to `size_t`/`ptrdiff_t`. But this requires the you to never use `[unsigned] long` in the API directly to avoid conflicts. This is achieved by passing `--canonicalize-long-to-size_t` to the parser.

Then, if you never use `[u]int64_t` in the API, you're done. But can trade the support of `[unsigned] long long` for the support of `[u]int64_t` by also passing `--canonicalize-64-to-fixed-size-typedefs` to the parser to have it rewrite `[unsigned] long long` (which is what `[u]int64_t` expands to on Emscripten) back to `[u]int64_t`. Then `[u]int64_t` will work, but `[unsigned] long long` will stop working, because if you try to use it in your API, you'll get `[u]int64_t` from the parser, which will then be rewritten to `[unsigned] long` on Linux (rather than `long long`), resulting in type mismatches and compilation errors.
