# Lifetime extension / keep-alive

In C# and Python, people expect to not have dangling references, and for them to be magically solved with GC magic.

This is especially important in C#. In Python you can just be careful and manually avoid dangling, but in C# the compiler will aggressively destroy local variables early if it thinks they are no longer needed, and it can't see when C++ objects store references to each other internally, so mrbind has to actively counteract this, and we can't just rely on the user being careful.

The dangling prevention annotations are unified across target languages, they are implemented in the parser.

We recycle some of Clang's attributes ([`[[clang::lifetimebound]]`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#lifetimebound) and [`[[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)]]`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#lifetime-capture-by)), which in addition to helping mrbind also give you nice warnings. We also have some of our own attributes, for cases when those are not expressive enough.

In C those attributes have no effect, but we dump them in function comments in a human-readable form.

## How dangling prevention works

Each Python/C# object stores a list of (shared references to) other Python/C# objects that it wants to "keep alive", i.e. that should continue to exist while this object exists. In Python, this is accomplished with [`pybind11::keep_alive()`](https://pybind11.readthedocs.io/en/stable/advanced/functions.html#keep-alive). In C#, we manually maintain such lists in each object. Note that GC is those languages is supposed to be able to handle cyclic references, so those shouldn't be an issue.

When you call a Python/C# function generated by mrbind, the function can modify the keep-alive lists of its parameters, its return value, and of `this`.

Functions can be annotated to tell mrbind what (a parameter/return value/`this`) should keep-alive what.

## Function annotations

Each function has a list of `(holder, target)` pairs associated with it at compile-time, where `holder` and `target` are any of:

* A parameter of this function.

* `this`, if this is a member function.

* The return value (only allowed for `holder`, not `target`).

When the function is called, we do the equivalent of `holder.__keep_alive.push_back(target);` for every such pair.

To add such pair to a function, you need to add a certain C++ attribute to the `target`. *Which* attribute you add determines what the `holder` is.

`holder` and `target` are normally raw pointers or references, or classes holding those, or references to such classes. The annotations are ignored if they don't make sense for those `holder` and `target` types, so you can freely add them in templates, and they'll be ignored if not needed for specific template arguments.

### <code>\[\[[clang::lifetimebound](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#lifetimebound)\]\]</code>

If `holder` is the return value, add `[[clang::lifetimebound]]` to the `target`. It can be either immediately after a parameter name, or after the method parameter list to apply to `this` (after `const` if any). For example:

```cpp
struct A
{
    std::string arr[3];

    // holder = result, target = this
          std::string &front()       [[clang::lifetimebound]] {return arr[0];}
    const std::string &front() const [[clang::lifetimebound]] {return arr[0];}
};

// holder = result, target = param
std::string &foo(std::string &ref [[clang::lifetimebound]]) {return ref;}
std::string &foo(std::string &a [[clang::lifetimebound]], std::string &b [[clang::lifetimebound]]) {return a < b ? a : b;}
```

Note that when applied to a constructor, `lifetimebound` considers the constructed object to be the return value.

### <code>\[\[[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#lifetime-capture-by)\]\]</code>

If `holder` is a function parameter or `this`, add `[[clang::lifetime_capture_by(holder)]]` to the target, where `holder` is either a parameter name or `this`. For example:

```cpp
struct A
{
    std::string &ref;
};

// holder = vec, target = ref
void foo(std::string &ref [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(vec)]], std::vector<A> vec)
{
    vec.push_back({ref});
}


struct B
{
    std::vector<A> vec;

    // holder = this, target = ref
    void foo(std::string &ref [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(this)]])
    {
        vec.push_back({ref});
    }
};


struct C
{
    struct Ptr
    {
        C *c;
    };

    // holder = ptr, target = this
    void foo(Ptr &ptr) [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(ptr)]]
    {
        ptr.c = this;
    }
})
```

Note that when applied to a constructor, `lifetime_capture_by(this)` acts as `lifetimebound`.

Note that `[[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)]]` requires Clang 20 or newer. If you build mrbind with an older Clang, you must use our alternative custom attributes instead. Sadly, those have to be spelled differently when `target` is a parameter vs `this`. For example:

```cpp
struct A
{
    std::string &ref;
};

void foo(std::string &ref [[clang::annotate("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by=vec")]], std::vector<A> vec)
{
    vec.push_back({ref});
}


struct C
{
    struct Ptr
    {
        C *c;
    };

    // holder = ptr, target = this
    void foo(Ptr &ptr) [[clang::annotate_type("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by=ptr")]]
    {
        ptr.c = this;
    }
})
```

Notice `annotate` vs `annotate_type` when applied to a parameter vs to `this`.

Later in this document we provide macros to dispatch between those custom attributes and Clang's ones depending on Clang version.

### Nested lifetime extension

We have "nested" alternatives to `[[clang::lifetimebound]]` and `[[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)]]`, that are custom attributes.

Consider `std::vector<T>::push_back(const T &)`. The vector doesn't need to keep-alive the entire parameter. If you tried to apply `lifetime_capture_by(this)` to the parameter, and then tried to insert a temporary in C++ code, Clang would warn, because the attribute makes it look like that would form a dangling reference (as if `vector` stores a reference to the parameter), which isn't true.

Yet, the parameter clearly needs *some* annotation, since if the parameter is a class with a reference/pointer in it, that nested reference would dangle on insertion.

Notice that the Python/C# wrapper for `std::vector<T>` stores C++ `T` objects, not Python/C# `T` objects. If you insert a Python/C# temporary into it, the underlying C++ object will be copied into the vector, but the corresponding Python/C# object will get destroyed quickly, if it's a temporary. And the keep-alive lists are stored in Python/C# objects, not in C++ objects.

Therefore the keep-alive list of the inserted object will not be automatically preserved in the vector, unless we annotate `push_back()` in some way.

Enter nested attributes.

```cpp
struct A
{
    std::string &ref;
}

struct VectorA
{
    std::vector<A> vec;

    void push_back(const A &a [[clang::annotate("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by_nested=this")]]) {vec.push_back(a);}

    // This one doesn't need to be nested.
    void push_back(std::string &str [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(this)]]) {vec.push_back({str});}
};
```

And similarly we have `[[clang::annotate("mrbind::lifetimebound_nested")]]` to act as a nested `[[clang::lifetimebound]]`.

The nested attributes indicate that we don't need to preserve the entire parameter, just its keep-alive list. Note that it's not wrong for a language backend to preserve the entire parameter *anyway* (which is what we're currently doing at the time of writing). This only affects memory usage, not correctness.

Once again, notice that if `[[clang::annotate(...)]]` applies to `this` (is spelled after a method parameter list), you must use `[[clang::annotate_type(...)]]` instead. This means that while `[[clang::lifetimebound]]` works with the same spelling on both parameters and `this`, the nested `"mrbind::lifetimebound_nested"` needs different spellings on those, using `annotate` vs `annotate_type` respectively.

### Macros for the attributes

It's recommended that you use following macros to apply those attributes, instead of using them directly.

This lets you disable them when not using Clang, to avoid warnings about unused attributes. It also lets you dispatch between different attributes on older vs newer Clang.

```cpp
// Replace `@MYLIB@` with your library name.

#ifdef __clang__
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIMEBOUND [[clang::lifetimebound]]
#  if __clang_major__ >= 20 // Added in Clang 20.
#    define @MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x)      [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)]]
#    define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x) [[clang::lifetime_capture_by(x)]]
#  else
#    define @MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x)      [[clang::annotate     ("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by=" #x)]]
#    define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x) [[clang::annotate_type("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by=" #x)]]
#  endif
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIMEBOUND_NESTED      [[clang::annotate     ("mrbind::lifetimebound_nested")]]
#  define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIMEBOUND_NESTED [[clang::annotate_type("mrbind::lifetimebound_nested")]]
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY_NESTED(x)      [[clang::annotate     ("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by_nested=" #x)]]
#  define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY_NESTED(x) [[clang::annotate_type("mrbind::lifetime_capture_by_nested=" #x)]]
#else
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIMEBOUND
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x)
#  define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x)
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIMEBOUND_NESTED
#  define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIMEBOUND_NESTED
#  define @MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY_NESTED(x)
#  define @MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY_NESTED(x)
#endif
```

Use the `THIS` versions of the attributes when placing them after the parameter list of a method (to apply to `this`), and the non-`THIS` versions when applying them to a parameter. Using the wrong one will cause a compilation error, so you won't miss it.

If you're sure you only want Clang 20 or newer, you can get rid of the `#if __clang_major__ >= 20`. Then you can also merge `@MYLIB@_THIS_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY` into `@MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY(x)`, since they will expand to the same thing anyway.

## What needs annotating?

Here's an incomplete list of what functions need to be annotated.

* Anything that takes a reference and returns it, or stores it in `this`.

* Anything that returns a reference to `this` or to a class field.

This applies not only to references, but also to raw pointers, and to classes storing references or raw pointers.

In particular, you need to annotate all custom containers:

* Methods returning references to elements: `@MYLIB@_LIFETIMEBOUND` on `this`.
* Methods inserting new elements: `@MYLIB@_LIFETIME_CAPTURE_BY_NESTED(this)` on the inserted parameter (this begins to matter only if the element type is a class storing raw pointers or references).

## Inferring annotations

When mrbind generates custom bindings for something, it's mrbind's responsibility to automatically provide the annotations for it. E.g.:

* When generating the bindings for standard containers.

* When generating elementwise constructor for an aggregate (a struct or a class with no custom constructors, that can be initialized with a list of its members in C++).

In some cases, you can tell the parser to guess the annotations, if you don't feel like spelling them manually.

* `--infer-lifetime-iterators` for `begin()`, `end()`, and unary `operator*`. You should always use this flag, there's no reason to avoid it. We might enable it by default at some point.

* `--infer-lifetime-constructors` for all constructors other than copy/move constructors. This adds `[[clang::lifetimebound]]` to every parameter of those constructors.

  This assumes that the constructor might store a reference to the parameter in the resulting class instance. While not always the case, the worst that can happen is an increased memory usage.
